[DX 815] Improve Plugins Overview (#4918)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: tyk-docs/content/product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/plugins/api-config/overview.md

---
date: 2024-08-28
title: Overview
description: "This section explains an overview for how to configure plugins for APIs"
tags: [ "plugins" ]
---

> This page provides an overview for configuring one or more API-level custom plugins that can be optionally setup to execute for each of the following [hooks]({{< ref "plugins/plugin-types/plugintypes#plugin-and-hook-types" >}}) in the API request/response lifecycle: *Pre*, *Authentication*, *Post*, *Post Authentication* and *Response*. If you wish to learn how to configure API-level Analytics plugins please refer to the [Analytics plugins]({{< ref "plugins/plugin-types/analytics-plugins" >}}) page. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page provides an overview on how to register one or more custom plugins to be executed at different stages or [hooks]({{< ref "plugins/plugin-types/plugintypes#plugin-and-hook-types" >}}) in the API request/response lifecycle. If you wish to learn how to register custom plugins to be executed on the traffic logs generated by the Gateway please refer to the [analytics plugins]({{< ref "plugins/plugin-types/analytics-plugins" >}}) page. 
```

> If you desire fine grained control at the endpoint level then it is also possible to configure [per-endpoint plugins]({{< ref "product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/endpoint-plugin" >}}). These are custom Golang plugins that are triggered at the end of the request processing chain before API-level *Post* plugins are executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need fine-grained control at the endpoint level then it is also possible to configure [per-endpoint plugins]({{< ref "product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/endpoint-plugin" >}}). These are custom Golang plugins that are triggered at the end of the request processing chain before API-level *Post* plugins are executed.
```

---

## Introduction

There are three locations where Tyk Gateway can find plugin functions:

1. **gRPC plugins**: Plugin functions are implemented by a gRPC server with the associated configuration specified with the API definition. For further details on how to configure gRPC plugins, please refer to our [gRPC]({{< ref "plugins/supported-languages/rich-plugins/grpc" >}}) documentation.

> 2. **Plugin bundles**: The plugin source code and configuration are bundled into a zip file that is served by a remote web server. For further details see the [plugin bundles]({{< ref "plugins/how-to-serve-plugins/plugin-bundles" >}}) page.

Reviewer: I would swap (2) and (3)

Author: Thanks Andy, updated

| `Require session state`| When set to true, Tyk Gateway will serialize the request session state and pass it as an argument to the function that implements the plugin in the target language. This is applicable to Post, Response, and Authentication hooks only |

---

## Language configuration

For local and bundle plugins a [plugin driver]({{< ref "plugins/supported-languages#plugin-driver-names" >}}) is configured to specify the plugin implementation language. If using gRPC plugins a `grpc` plugin driver should be used to instruct Tyk to request execution of plugins from within a gRPC server that is external to the Tyk process. This offers additional language support since Tyk can integrate with a gRPC server that is implemented using any supported [gRPC language](https://grpc.io/docs/).

For a given API it is not possible to mix the implementation language for the plugin types: Pre, Authentication, Post, Post Authentication and Response plugins. For example, it is not possible to implement a pre request plugin in *Go* and also implement a post request plugin in *Python* for the same API.

---

## Next steps

> If you’re using the legacy Tyk Classic APIs, then check out the [configuring plugins for Tyk Classic APIs]({{< ref "/product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/plugins/api-config/classic" >}}) page for further details.

Reviewer: Please swap these and put Tyk OAS first

Author: Thanks Andy, updating
